yes so welcome and so people refer to
you by your full name they call you
Michael Reese um it's it's really
whatever the flavor of what you're
feeling is you what do you what are you
because people that like you know it's
interesting because I just look at you
know who we're talking to today and I
wanna see like your name with first name
and last name yeah I've noticed that I
not intentionally I've done that
Michaels fun okay some friends call me
Mike hmm okay what do you what do you
prefer
Micra Mike Michaels good okay cool so
tell me is there something in particular
you want to talk about today or not not
really I just kind of came into it
looking a talk of a conversation um
see what you can glean out of it cool um
there are a couple things that I think
are like maybe like stereotypically kind
of for a discussion like this sometimes
you know there's like you know the
classic like I get anxious a lot stuff
like that but you know I'm really just
looking at talk about whatever's and
when you say you get anxious a lot what
does that mean I've like I was thinking
of things to talk about for the session
it that's just like you know something
that came up I often am anxious about
many things so if that's someone you
want to explore or it's really whatever
you want to get into I mean so I'm so
Michael think of me as a resource mm-hmm
so I have a wide background of training
from like meditation and spirituality to
like neuroscience and psychiatry so is
there something in that span that you're
curious about or you think could be
helpful for a particular dimension of
your life I suppose is there like a
little like your psychology sprinkled in
there
sure awesome
helpful I I suppose yeah um I I do
struggle with anxiety sometimes so maybe
that's something yeah we can get sure
I'm noticing a theme yeah yeah you get
anxious a lot about a lot of things as
you said yes yeah let's talk about that
so what do you get anxious about um a
lot of a lot of things very day-to-day
things like like whatever I'm doing for
work getting started with anything any
kind of project lots of things coming on
a show on Twitch that's not that wasn't
too bad but is this a show on Twitch is
this a show on Twitch yeah is that we
are we a show is this a show I suppose
it as a show okay I'm okay
I was just wanted to get this fell under
that umbrella but okay so you said
getting started on stuff sometimes doing
stuff on Twitch what else ah day-to-day
stuff you know the normal normal human
anxious things you know thinking about
the long general future of your life
[Music]
sure
long general future of your life what's
your background in neuroscience actually
so I did research for about I was a
research assistant in a neuroscience lab
for about 18 months to two years and
then you learn a lot of applied
neuroscience as in medical school and as
a psychiatrist so what is applied
neuroscience like how do you apply that
knowledge because I have no idea what
the field of neuroscience is like sure
so applied neuroscience is if you have
someone who is in a car accident and a
part of their brain is damaged then what
does that do to them and how do you work
with that so that's like applied
neuroscience another example of applied
neuroscience so I do a lot of mind-body
work
so for example how does the brain change
under prolonged periods of stress so
just here's an example of applied
neuroscience so let's say that someone
is under stress so stress releases a
hormone called releases a couple of
things so first thing it releases a is
adrenaline which burn or adrenaline
epinephrine a couple of these short
acting hormones those affect the brain
in certain ways so one thing that
adrenaline does is it collapses your
peripheral vision from about 180 degrees
to 30 degrees so that's an evolutionary
thing that kind of causes people to
focus in on like the center yeah
interestingly I think that it does that
psychologically too so generally
speaking when people are under periods
of stress they have trouble considering
things that are not right in front of
them the peripheral of you know your
mine exactly so they get they kind of
like tunnel down and just focus on one
thing over time so you also release a
hormone called cortisol which has a
slower duration of action so adrenaline
hits your body within seconds and lasts
four minutes cortisol starts to kick in
within the hour and will last for like
it has different kinds of physiological
and neurological effects for four to 24
hours one example is that it goes to
this little part in the back of your
brain called the reticular activating
formation which governs sleep and so the
reason that it does that is because when
we were when we were evolving and we
were like primates living in dangerous
situations if you add an adrenaline
response like if you saw a tiger in the
woods you want cortisol to keep your
reticular activating formation div and
make your sleep easily disturbing mm-hmm
right so like you want to wake up if you
hear something
yeah it's a evolutionary response
absolutely so the downside though is
that now when people are under mental
stress because we don't have Tigers
anymore but or etiology adapts to
current circumstances mm-hmm so when I'm
thinking about huh you can't
differentiate right you can't
differentiate your body uses what it has
and so then when I'm worried about
paying so today is July 8th so if I'm
thinking about paying rent at the end of
the month I'm gonna be in a prolonged
period of stress which is gonna make it
hard for me to sleep because every noise
that happens it's going to wake up wake
me up because my reticular activating
permission is like highly active that's
an example of what I would call applied
neuroscience awesome oh that's very cool
I was um I actually really considered
that's interesting I considered getting
into like psychology when I was in high
school I was like a crossroads before I
would choose
I was either choosing like computer
science video editing or psychology
I drew computer science how did you make
your decision oh I essentially just
flipped a coin really just just very
spur of the moment in which did you
choose one computer science yeah oh I'm
very happy I'm glad I didn't go in a
video editing that's for sure
so uh some thoughts about psychology but
pretty happy with what I chose when you
say you have some thoughts about
psychology what has happened okay well
you know I wonder what it would have
been like if I had actually ended up
pursuing psychology instead I was I was
really interested in it and in high
school but I'm quite glad with the
decision I made do you like to
understand how things work yes yes yeah
absolutely yeah like understanding the
inner workings of things I can see the
attraction to psychology for you that
yeah yeah looking at a phone you want to
know how the LCD screen is a little LED
screen works and I feel like I mean like
you're never gonna fully understand
maybe that's why I went with calm sigh
it was because in psychology there's
always more to do right you're never
gonna fully understand the human mind 40
second do you think he can actually
fully map out every inner working of the
human mind is that like
like a reasonable end goal psychology er
sure why not I don't know I feel like
like the minds and I don't know I'm not
sure you would be able to like have
reason for every thought that pops into
a head you know like be able to map each
and every little meme okay so let's
think about that so the first question
is are you talking about do you think
it's unreasonable to map out the origin
of every thought for every person are we
talking about mapping out the origin of
every thought for you other people I was
talking in a general sense about you
know any random you know X person on the
street sure I think that sounds
difficult what do you think about for
you I don't to what extent um I think
you probably get pretty deep in there
about why I think the things I do i've
degree mm-hmm I think that that's yeah I
mean I I think that it's hard to
understand other people completely but I
do hope that you could understand
yourself completely I think that's what
there's this term enlightenment or
workshop in Sanskrit which is like when
people meditate for a while they gain
enlightenment and apparently it's hard
and happens rarely but if we think about
just the the translation like it
suggests knowledge mmm-hmm and so it's
sort of a complete understanding of self
and so I don't know if that's possible
or not but I think that you can
certainly make I mean I think you can
understand most of yourself like I think
that the human mind ultimately is
reducible to scientific principles and
if it's reducible the scientific
principles as opposed to RNG then I
think you can understand it I agree with
that is that something you seek to do is
to understand the way other people think
or to help people understand themselves
I'd say more of the latter
okay so
we can kind of come back to the anxiety
over the long general future of your
life so what are you worried about in
terms of is it okay if I ask you talk
more in the third person we can do that
oh um dive in as far as you want I I've
just always kind of struggled with
anxiety that's just something that's
like been very prevalent and my life
since you know the early days I think of
high school so can we actually pause
there for a second when you say you
struggled with anxiety since high school
mm-hmm what can you tell me like show me
what that like help me understand what
does that mean like paint me a picture
sure it's a lot of it started a lot of
social anxiety so like not being able to
talk to people in high school then
getting you know I think I think I had a
long very worried idea of what my future
was gonna be in high school because I
didn't have any plans yeah originally I
had no plans for what I was gonna do
after high school I was just kind of
winging it yeah and so I think that was
a very yeah prevalent creeping anxiety
for you know what how am I going to
survive after this and it led to like
less planning because that meant you
know accepting the fact that you have to
do something after high school and yet
that's yeah I don't know it just I I
can't actually like pinpoint the exact
time then it started happening but it
started happening at some point where I
become anxious about many things you
know like I'm not able to sleep very
well like I had that started in high
school so where I'm up at night you know
worrying about things it's gotten better
I've you know gone through like sleeping
techniques meditation techniques which
are nice for free man yeah what do you
worry about at night you know it's the
weirdest thing it's less of like
specific things and it's more like a
nebulous just impending like not not
impending but no just a nebulous anxiety
about the current state of things even
if everything is is good you know even
if everything going on
so would you call it like a nebulous red
yes that's a very nice poetic term yeah
I like that yeah so Michael I'd like to
toss out a couple things and let's talk
as scientist to scientist okay so what
I'm hearing is that there aren't
particular thoughts but that there's a
feeling right so the first thing to
understand is that sometimes people are
anxious about something like they're
anxious about a particular outcome like
let's I think you may have experienced
that so when you said not being able to
talk to people
what made it art in high school for you
to talk to people I think it was just
worried what what what would become of
the conversation what I would say you
know focused on the mechanics less
unlike the actual interpersonal the
reality of the conversation yeah so so
in what were you worried would happen if
the conversation became assert oh
probably that I'd look like a jackass
like you know look stupid right so
probably feeling dumb high school mean
so if we look at it that's a particular
fear right it's a it's an anxiety that
has form or shape those thoughts have
like their thoughts like if I say this
or if I don't say this they're gonna
think I'm stupid
hmm what you're describing to me now
seems to be like a general sense of
dread that doesn't it's not that
thoughts result in dread mm-hmm whereas
I would almost say that your thoughts
sort of result in the feeling of anxiety
in high school mm-hmm does that make
sense like you have particular thoughts
and those thoughts lead to feelings yes
does the feeling come before the thought
or does the feeling come after the
thought it seems I I would say the the
feeling comes before the thought yes
okay almost as if it's stemming from
from the feeling okay so that's the
substitute so the interesting thing is
that then we can say that your feelings
can manifest as particular thoughts
mm-hmm but your sense of dread does not
manifest in any particular way it's just
like a raw sense of dread okay what
would you say to that I could agree it's
hard to know what is the symptom and
what is like like the cause it's hard to
know if like you know I'm you know the
chicken or the egg like if I'm worried
about something coming up and that's
creating the feeling or the feeling is
there and I'm just applying it to
something that's coming up great so I'd
say it's hard to say yes it is hard to
say so we can tunnel down into that so
what you're what I'm hearing you almost
suggests is that there's a possibility
that the feeling will latch on to or
hijack particular things in your life
okay um I could say that it's like like
I have latched on to as and I apply it
to things how exactly yeah that's what I
could agree with that yeah right so it's
kind of interesting because then that's
not actually like it's not that the
thing in your life is the source of
anxiety yeah exactly it's just something
that you conflate with each other yeah
so like I understand that you said
earlier that it's hard to understand
what's the chicken or what's the egg but
the interesting thing Michael is that I
think you actually have hypotheses baked
in to your description of things because
you I mean you said that like I don't
know if it like picks up something
that's happening in the future and kind
of applies itself to that does that make
sense yeah and if we think about how
does someone say that sentence it's
because they have noticed something that
could be true okay do you think I'm
already kind of have an idea for what's
going on absolutely because I'm not
actually telling you very much I'm
basically repeating back to you what you
said to me hmm
so it because if we really think about
it I mean you're the one who said it's
like nebulous right so it's not specific
to something but you've noticed
something within your mind that
sometimes this nebulous dread will like
apply itself to something in the future
yes yeah and and that's kind of weird
because it's like then where does that
come from because it does
come from the future no yeah yeah it's
just ever-present yeah so how does it
feel to have ever-present threat you
know it's not great obviously but I
think I've kind of you know I've watched
a lot of videos and read some things on
how to deal with this type of you know
anxiety and dread it's definitely better
now like I think one that helped a lot
was like it's it's not you're not
supposed to or one of the ways of
dealing with it is not like pushing it
away completely like pretending it
doesn't exist it's more like accepting
that it is you know a part of who you
are as a person and like learning to
live with that in everyday life and that
that is very helpful because then you
yeah it's a I think it's a healthier way
of dealing with it
that's one that helped me okay so
healthier way okay so Michael I think
this conversation is gonna be a little
bit different from many that we have on
stream okay is it okay if I tell you how
I think it's gonna be different and sort
of get your permission to let it be
different fairly lay it on me man so
sometimes we talk about things that are
like anxiety like so sometimes we talk
about feelings we talk about emotions we
talk about experiences when we may get
there for you but I don't know if it's
just the way I'm feeling today or the
way that you're talking today or the
background that you have or the way that
you speak but I would really like to
help you understand or maybe we can
explore together like what the [ __ ] is
going on here sure yeah what is it like
what is it like how does that work like
what is what is existential dread is it
like is it anxiety because or is it like
is you just born this way or like is
this like repressive like what is that
but your does the [ __ ] come from let's
figure it out right right so so okay so
in order to do that we're gonna have to
really tunnel down into a lot of what
you say because I think you have a lot
of brilliant answers that you that
Macross is sort of like unsure
observations uh-huh so when you said
okay we don't know what's the chicken
and the egg and then you said I've read
a lot about it awesome you know I've
thought a lot about it great and what I
have discovered or what seems to help is
there are certain ways of dealing with
it and then you said pushing pushing it
away is not the best way to deal with it
yeah sort of letting it be a part of you
accepting it is like a better way to
deal with it and it doesn't bother me as
much yeah so now let's tunnel down into
what you're saying okay so both of these
have to do with responses to the
existential threat
yes that's do you see that that's
completely different from the origin or
getting rid of it
mm-hmm and so I would agree with you
that pushing it away is not that healthy
is that something you've done before
yeah I think that's like your initial
reaction to any negative feeling right
as a person like get you know fire hot
back run is kind of the idea but I mean
not the you know not the general way not
the best way to apply to every negative
thing you know this so how did you push
it away I think just ignoring it and
then ignoring it you know makes it worse
so okay and how does one ignore it I try
to put your focus on other things you
know very good distraction or yeah a
distraction what else I can think of
none other than distraction okay so
that's probably lucky because some
people ignore it through things like
using substances losing themself in
gaming so that to sort a distraction
yeah so I'm not yeah so those I guess
those are the same let me just think
about why do I think about that
okay so let's just call that distract
you every time you have like like
dissonance in your mind do you try to go
in and like fix it like every time you
do you often do that what you just did
where you wonder why you had that
thought process and like go in and that
look like what you just did right were
you oh that's that's cool
yeah I do that a lot I I don't see a lot
of people doing it that's I don't see a
lot of people doing it either
you think it's important people go in
and fix dissonance in their mind yes I
think it's very important I think that's
half of what's wrong with the world
today yeah we got a mental health idea
Aaron like that interpersonal tenna not
even health or interpersonal I think
just like human beings don't question
the conclusions of their mind mmm
because I absolutely I agree I agree
yeah so I think we're not taught how to
do that
mm-hmm so I think it's a skill yeah I
think self checking is very important
yeah so it's interesting because if you
want to take take a quick tangent and
talk about like evolutionary
neuroscience our brains are not decided
to do that so if you think about it what
our brains are decided to do is create
certainty from uncertainty so like in a
very simple sense like back in the day
like you know let's say you wake up in
your hut and then you're like where
should I go look for food mm-hmm that is
a cop a problem that is so complicated
and you have so little information that
it's impossible to answer where should
you go look for food you have no [ __ ]
idea
north-south-east-west I don't know now
later how far how long should I go north
before I go east and so human females
huh that's a complex problem yeah
absolutely there's no way to answer so
what our brain is designed to do is to
take gigantic swathes of uncertainty and
give us answers and it says hey hey you
should go this way and you're like why
and then your brain is like I don't know
just do it we're gonna just assume that
this is the right way that's how most of
our brain works yeah yeah that's varies
and then you get reinforcement over time
as you
find like a berry by the somewhere by
the creek you go north you think sure
arts is for food yeah and then even if
you don't get reinforcements you still
don't think you're wrong you still don't
even if you don't get reinforcements you
still don't know really yep thank you if
I go like north for like five miles and
I don't find any berry bushes I'm gonna
be like pretty pissed right but I still
think I'm not wrong nope you won't think
you're wrong you'll be like let me go a
different way okay okay sorry
so there are modern manifestations of
this too so there have been studies done
on like you know like packaging and
placement of items within a store so
like if you place a prominent display of
cookies at the checkout and then people
by the the cookie and then you ask the
person as they leave the grocery store
why did you buy the cookie they'll give
you a reason they'll say like oh you
know Mike he really likes these cookies
but that's not actually the deciding
factor for why they bought it the reason
that they bought it is because of the
placement yeah and if it hadn't been
placed there
they wouldn't have purchased it so our
mind is actually designed to fabricate
logical reasons for illogical behavior
that's what it's made for it works like
backwards from the conclusion works
backwards from the conclusion is a
little weird
it's shocking and strange yeah why why
do you think it what does it do that
because that's the only way it works
because thousands of years ago millions
of years ago we had to manually just
think about out like an animal doesn't
understand how anything works but it has
to act with certainty uh-huh there's no
[ __ ] idea like we have no like you
actually don't know like if I stepped
outside today I could get hit by a
meteor that's a possibility like it's on
you there's so much uncertainty in the
world and we just assume like I assume
that like my family is behind me in the
house even though I don't know that oh I
know that huh Michael is
michael is quiet is that our urine thing
or I can also turn it I turned you up a
little bit okay great
so yeah we I mean our our brain operates
based primarily on assumptions that we
assume or facts like everyday if you get
up get in your car and you drive to work
you assume that your workplace is gonna
be there even though you don't know that
okay like it could've been like
swallowed by an earthquake okay all
right
is there like why do we do you think
animals have to have that reasoning as
well yes okay it's not just like food
here food good it's like there needs to
be a reasoning to forgetting that food
no no I mean so it's a food here food
good as that's real but like most of the
world is uncertain
like if you're a deer and I wake up in
the morning I'm like where where are the
Predators I have no idea but if I if I
get paralyzed by the lack of knowledge I
won't act so the reason that we act in
ignorance is because that's like that's
how most human beings function through
most of their life like four-year-olds
don't know what's gonna happen next and
the problem existential dread so now
we're gonna talk a little bit about
where things come from let's come from
the capacity to realize that you don't
know what's coming back so Michael your
problem in high school was not that was
actually one of knowledge not ignorance
okay it's like knowledge that I know
very little yeah like you don't know
what's gonna happen next which happens
to most people in high school but some
people tend to get worried about it and
some people don't and generally speaking
in my experience people who have more
calculating who have more RAM and more
computing power tend to have more excess
existential dread
what do you think about that um I don't
know I feel like many I feel like a lots
of people can experience existential
dread
I don't like sheerly based on like your
ability to compute information I do not
think it's really based on your ability
to compute information but you've
observed that I have observed that the
smarter you are the worse your anxiety
okay that's interesting so like if you
think about anxiety what is anxiety
anxiety is generally speaking worried
worrying about consequences of future I
mean worrying about future consequences
of actions taken today present actions
yeah right so if you can foresee more
problems mmm what do you think happens
to your anxiety no of course you have
more yep and now we get to something
really interesting which is if you have
a part of your mind which latches on to
things and sort of hijacks them mm-hmm
and you give it more food for things to
highjack on to what's gonna happen I
just breathes more anxiety of course
right absolutely right it's gonna find
something yeah yeah yeah it definitely
takes up a large amount of you know the
other mental mental juice as it were so
when you say it takes up a large part of
I would think about it as a large part
of your mental juices generating things
and the more mental juice so there are
different kinds of anxiety so there are
so there are people for example with
Down syndrome or other kinds of like
cerebral palsy who will experience
intense anxiety even though their
computing power is pretty low but in my
experience the flavor of that anxiety is
different okay how so it's more like
existential dread so we'll get to that
in a second but so so some of that is
more physiologic anxiety but it's not
like neurotic anxiety so like we think
about neurosis which is the tendency to
worry so there's like neurotic anxiety
which is kind of like you worry about
lots of stuff and then some people just
have feelings that they can't shape and
that feeling will latch on to anything
no matter how small it is okay so that
because anxiety is not just a mental
sensation as well right there's a
physiologic component yeah your heart
rate will elevate oh yeah I got that
reading problems and all oh yeah exactly
and so that to those physiologic changes
will affect the function of your mind
even though the root of it may not be
mind so what I mean by that is that if
you have
if your heart rate is elevated you're
gonna have a sympathetic nervous
response
you're gonna release adrenaline and what
adrenaline literally does to your brain
is starts to increase the speed of your
thoughts make thoughts black and white
and makes your thoughts that are
possibilities feel like realities okay
so it takes something that might be and
it turns it into something that's
definitely gonna happen certainty okay
and that too is evolutionary because
once upon a time there were two human
beings who each faced a tiger and one
human being saw the danger as a
possibility and one human being saw the
danger is a reality which human being is
more likely to survive Nona sees it as a
reality
absolutely so adrenaline makes
possibilities about the future feel real
and that's what our brain is [ __ ]
designed to do mm-hmm so anyway a
physiologic anxiety can sort of
reinforce certain thoughts but there's a
physiological component there's a
cognitive component there's sort of a
neurotic yeah I see what you're saying
yeah I don't think we've still got into
the source of your existential dread but
we're kind of mapping things out oh yeah
I understand it better okay any
questions so far
cool no no I'm enjoying the ride okay
now is this I never really thought about
the differences and like different types
of anxieties more nebulous or more
focused that's cool yeah so I think part
of the problem is that we use the word
anxiety to describe a lot of different
things yeah general kind of term so let
me ask you something Michael by the way
how you feeling right now I'm fine
I'm just having a good interesting very
interesting talk so you feel like this
is a good use of our time yeah for sure
okay so let me ask you something
qualitatively would you say that your
existential dread is like roughly the
same or roughly different as being
concerned that people are gonna think
you're gonna look stupid roughly I
couldn't repeat the question yeah like
would you say that that's the same thing
like existential dread and like the way
they used to feel in high school like
when you were concerned about inner
interactions and looking stupid do those
feel like different things to you or do
they feel like the same thing I think
it's a rat it's very close to the same
feeling that I have okay I don't know if
it is the same thing but it's it's close
to the same feeling can you help us
understand that feeling at all or is
that difficult it's no that's that's a
gut in the gut where it you know
wrenches up and yeah you know it's like
you're nervous you're very you're you're
anxious you're okay what if this happens
but so your existential dread also makes
you feel things like physically in your
in your stomach or your gut is it
sometimes you know you know if I'm like
really nervous about something if I'm
like I'm like oh man I would really like
to do this thing and then I like you
know spend the whole day you know like
being a jackass and playing Ballarat
then I'll be like oh [ __ ] I should have
done that thing then I'll you know I'll
be anxious you know I'll have a like I
should have been doing something else
it's like you know I could have done
this I could have done that yeah and
then that's that's the gut feeling
that's the like the neurotic anxiety
feeling okay so I'm gonna call what you
just said there self judgement I'm not
gonna call that anxiety okay
yeah lots of self judgment okay right so
does that sort of make sense like like
you're not worried so there's like so
let's just look at that for a second so
let's go back to Michael in high school
is afraid of talking to someone because
he thinks they're going to look stupid
okay yeah so that is Michael being in
the present and looking into the future
got it self judgment is different
because it's Michael beating himself up
for the past yes okay yeah now there
could be a future component to that too
so I think I think about anxiety is
something that's forward facing and I
think about regret is something that's
backward facing sometimes you can look
at the past day and think about the
consequences for tomorrow yeah
absolutely
do you do that yeah okay so then that I
would classify as anxiety but I think
self judgment is
right so like self-judgement is like
looking at yourself and saying I didn't
do a good job I'm not good enough
okay and you would say that's different
from anxiety yes I would describe
anxiety as worrying about the future
okay I I think III probably the self
judgement is probably a proponent to it
it's like oh I [ __ ] this up maybe you
know the future might change due due to
it you know so so agree so there's like
this whole cesspool of all of this
negativity in all of our minds and so I
think it's but the point I'm making is
that if you can stop the self judgement
then your anxiety has less fuel okay I
think a fundamental reason like I don't
is because I associate self judgment
with like being better as like a person
you know it's like it's like oh I'm
gonna do that the next time all you know
did you [ __ ] this X thing better yes
so now we get to another really
important thing which is just like
everything else that I've described self
judgement serves a very important part
so I think the tricky thing about being
a human is that a lot of what is good
for us makes us suffer okay
self judgement discipline kind of type
beats absolutely right so like when I
have people so I work with some people
who are like very professionally
academically or financially successful
and boy do they beat the [ __ ] out of
themselves and it's part of the reason
that they beat the [ __ ] up that's why
they're successful so the reason that
like if you look at medical students
medical students are super super anxious
and highly neurotic actually neurotic is
a better term and the reason for that is
because like the reason they got into
Medical School in the first place is
because when other people were out
partying on a Friday night they were
afraid of doing poorly on the test they
were at home studying
so most professional success is
correlated with - there's this thing
called the five factor model of you
heard of it before no I'm okay so it's a
it's a well validated personality
structure that way has been
scientifically like studied quite
extensively and basically what they
found is that there are two
factors one is conscientiousness and one
is a neuroticism
yeah the higher you are in neuroticism
and conscientiousness the more
professionally successful oh that's
that's interesting that makes sense
what are awful little so how do you deal
with that because that sounds like a
very like desolate piece of the human
condition where it's like the more
neurotic and self judging you are the
more successful you become isn't that
like kind of awful yes so I think
desolate is a beautiful term to describe
their lives so so it's that they they
have a lot of success but their life
feels empty it's actually a very good
way to describe their lives so it's so
good Michael that I wonder if you have
experienced that yet you know for sure
where it's like yeah I've uh I taught
myself to it might have been the reason
I I taught myself to code in high school
was um it was worried well the reason
was because I needed a job afterwards so
you know I mentioned that I picked
between like psych and video editing and
Comp Sci and so I chose Comp Sci and I
taught myself how to do it in high
school and there was definitely like
neuroticism behind that like I sat in my
room for just like many weeks and months
and just you know studied one thing and
that's surely where that comes from but
you know I've you know I've been through
like the the gross like nine-to-five and
all that and it's like like I've
realized that you know
just like working constantly is a very
big pitfall you can fall into it's like
it feels safe but if you just focus only
on one thing it's it's detrimental to
you is like a human being
mm-hm so yeah I can I can agree that
that's where some of it comes from I've
been trying to do things different
that's actually something I've liked I I
think that's on my mind a lot it's like
the balance between like doing a lot of
work and not doing a lot of work and
like being a human being you know mm-hmm
yeah it's tough and I think I you know
it's a beautiful word I I'd never really
thought of it that way but their lives
really are desolate and I think that
just goes to show that I think you
understand more about we're talking
about them maybe you know because I
think that that you know your ability to
conjure that word comes from
understanding like if you think about
like how do we know what words to use
mm-hmm so like tons from understanding
yeah it stems from usually from
experience hmm okay so let's just can I
try to recap for a second and keep us
focused yeah okay so the first thought
is that there's you know there's
different kinds of anxiety right so
there's like maybe this existential
dread I'm not even gonna call that
anxiety for a second there's the
physiologic components of anxiety and
sometimes there are mental there's like
a neurotic kind of anxiety which is
worrying about the future there is self
judgment which can sort of feed anxiety
but it's not exactly the same as anxiety
uh-huh so self judgment is kind of
beating yourself up and then sometimes
in that process of beating yourself up
you start to worry more about the future
because the more of a piece of [ __ ] you
are the more bleak the future becomes
right but interestingly enough so those
two like self judgment and anxiety get
together they tango and the whole is
greater than the sum of its parts
mm-hm so one thing you can do is focus
on self judgment another thing you can
do is focus on being in the present
because anxiety is always future
thinking so if you are thinking about
the now you cannot be anxious yeah
actually that's only true for neurotic
anxiety if you have physiologic anxiety
you can be in the now and it you can
still be anxious because it's a physical
sense
yeah there's then also we kind of talked
about that and then the other thing that
you mentioned is that there are ways to
deal with it so one way to deal with it
is you put it as pushing away or
distraction great and another way to
deal with it is to learn how to sit with
it let it be a part of you not push it
away
and that seems to help so mm-hmm yeah
sounds like a pretty good summary of
what we've covered no good recap okay so
now let's go back to the existential
dread first of all any questions no no
no okay
so let me ask you something how long
have you felt the existential dread I
attached the word existential to it
because that's yeah maybe since probably
like around the start maybe the middling
of high school okay I think it's it
might have started with like how am I
gonna like survive after high school
because I'm very like I seek to be
self-sufficient I don't like to seek
help a lot so like I didn't I very much
didn't want to like rely on anyone after
you know becoming an adult getting out
in the world I need good you know why
not then it's just a personality trait I
have a you know hard time asking for
help
okay good aspects and bad aspects to it
okay so let me ask you something how
long have you been self-reliant what do
we mean self-reliant so like you said
how long have you not wanted to depend
on other people very long very I'd it's
I've wanted to be self-reliance and for
a long time okay can you tell me when
you started to feel that way you know I
can't really pinpoint it but it's
definitely like when I look back like a
lot of the like conflicts I've had like
like with parents for example like even
before high school
weird stemmed from and want to be
self-reliant right okay
so surely further back than high school
like it's just kind of been like a
personality trait that I've you know
recognized you know in the in retrospect
can I think first
yeah go for it
you
would you say that your existential
dread kind of feels like worrying that
you won't be able to take care of
yourself um yeah yeah yeah that's a good
way to put it
you
okay can I have another second to think
yeah
you
I'm trying to figure out what direction
to go and I won I'm relying on my mind
to generate some idea of certainty from
uncertainty do you see multiple paths
through it again
I do see multiple paths it helps that
we've been able to define your
existential dread because that's half
the problem I didn't think we would get
there I think about it a lot now the
problem that I have is I feel like I
know the answer I just don't know the
question hey you want to lead me
somewhere yep right I have a hypothesis
I just don't know how to investigate it
okay so the first thing that I want to
say is that so we've talked about
different kinds of ways to deal with
this right so there's existential dread
self-judgement amplifies things right so
that's like a multiplying effect there
are coping mechanisms like distraction
there are other sort of coping
mechanisms like acceptance maybe that's
not quite coping unclear whether coping
is the right word there but there are
ways to deal with people through math of
it
mm-hmm there are things that amplify it
we still have not gotten to where it
comes from and there's another question
which is can we actually yank it out
root and stem can we find where this
feeling originates and if we find its
origin does that help us in some way
okay a lot of questions those like six
questions on that sentence yeah I don't
know does finding the source of
something mean that it helps I think
maybe in some way maybe an understanding
right sure but you know just cuz you I
don't know it's a good example just cuz
you know you're the you know the the
fact that you have a cold doesn't mean
you don't have a cold anymore you can
understand it right but you stopped a
cold yeah I think it helps for
understanding or for treatment right if
you know I've yet you have a cold you go
and get you know sudafed or whatever
yeah I would agree so so that's why we
asked the question because let's not
make the assumption that discovering the
origin will fix it yeah one is does it
help uh yeah I think it yes ah hard to
say right this is sure it's not a cold
it's something else I think it's if at
the very least it's worth trying to get
to yeah so so let's do that and let's
see let's be scientific so let's not
make assumptions that this is going to
be helpful maybe it'll help maybe we can
find maybe it doesn't have an origin
maybe it does we don't know right so you
kind of said that the existential dread
is like and this is like you said
something about an anxiety about the
long general future of your life it is
that also like generally speaking could
I describe that as worrying about
whether you're gonna be able to take
care of yourself um in some kind of way
I like logically I I think with like I
think I'll always be able to I even if
worse comes to worse like I lose I get
like everything I don't know I get like
you know my credits stolen or whatever I
think from the ground up I will be able
to like come back from just about
anything great so I think that's a
really important point because that
tells us that that sensation of not
being able or worrying about taking care
of yourself doesn't come from logic no
no it's a logical hundred I have
accepted this absolutely it's I'm at a
point where like I I know that I could
you know like get a job you know doing
computer science somewhere and it's like
it's not rooted in logic absolutely not
you're still there yep so then we can
also acknowledge another interesting
consequence of that which is that there
are parts of our mind that are not do
not originate in logic okay so let's go
back to this so you said that a lot of
your conflict with your parents had to
do with like your desire to be
independent well it's more like I I
recognize that I have that desire to be
independent and I can go back and see
oh this was you know the this was why we
had this conflict and I'm like oh it's
is because we it's because I wanted to
be you know more independent and I
didn't give us an example it's it's like
oh okay I'm sure I in high school very
much wanted I decided to do you know
computer science and so I instead of so
I stopped paying attention to classes in
high school just like kind of just you
know I showed up did my thing sometime I
have like my computer and I was just
like I'm gonna learn one thing it's it's
computer science right so that you know
cause problems cuz you know your parents
obviously want you have good grades so
that caused a large conflict learn you
know we get in touch with a counselor
everyone's like stop doing this you know
pay attention in school but that's you
know that's an example of how I how did
you feel when you got taken to the
counselor oh you know I was a little
pissed right cuz I'm like man I just
want a job after high school like my
English class isn't really helping me
for for job security in the future at
least I knew I wasn't gonna be you know
a writer or anything so you know a
little mad but you know I I just kind of
ignored it yeah a little pissed right
you know yeah little pisses on you I'm
trying to do this thing for job security
but I understand like my mom is a first
generation Filipino immigrant my dad is
he is very nice but sometimes he's weird
like as a person and so like there's not
always like a huge level of
Understanding between me and my parents
cuz I don't know we different
backgrounds obviously it's you know we
still you know love each other obviously
you know but I kind of you know learned
to accept that we're not always gonna
see eye-to-eye on something and I just
you know I kept going with what I was
doing I was you know [ __ ] you guys I'm
gonna keep doing
so now we get to an interesting and my
mind I have an interesting
chicken-or-egg question which is like
does the existential dread of worrying
about not being able to take care of
yourself come from your independence or
does your independence come from from
yeah I don't know how to I'm gonna stop
that I I kind of I kind of got what yeah
I'm picking up what you're putting down
I don't you mean yeah I know I I have
the thought that yeah okay
and what do you think tick you late
[ __ ] a long round it doesn't really
matter but hmm very hard to say I don't
know why they have to be like mutually
exclusive I think they're related I'm
just trying to figure out so let me just
ask a different question um you said
that your dad is kind of a weird guy and
y'all have trouble seeing eye on things
he's nice
it's it's like he's a nice guy he is
nice my dad's nice sure but it's like we
do not we're very different people
mm-hmm I don't know how I became in that
like in my family very like strange
person and like in my family III thought
yes yeah but it's just now long have you
been a strange person in your family uh
you know pretty is the beginning yeah
what when I say strange it's not like
it's more like we're just kind of
fundamentally different people me and
you know the other would you say that
they don't understand you like to what
level of understanding me as a person I
I have some level of understanding it's
mostly they they do care about me that's
it's that at least I know I'm not I I
don't doubt that they're nice that they
love you and they care about
you've never suggested anything
suggesting there's a lot of luck yes
well what I see I got to put that
there so I don't sound like an [ __ ]
yeah so so good and I'm sorry I don't
mean to no III know I'm just I'm just
[ __ ] uh saying I know what you're
asking
i I don't maybe not fundamentally no I
think that's the answer you're looking
for no yeah I mean it's it's my
hypothesis but don't just give me the
answer I'm looking for it give me the
answer that's true no that's the answer
that's true I think you got it you got
it
okay so let me ask you something what
happens to a child who is not understood
they they do their own mean they go in
their own kind of adventure yeah and
they do go on their own adventure and
what does that mean about reliance on
other people I think that leads to
independence absolutely what does that
mean about reliance on other people huh
so so a child who becomes independent
how do they feel about relying on other
people oh I suppose you don't like it
right just realize is that yeah I think
in a way yeah so when you're super
passionate about something and you're
concerned about something and then you
get taken to a school counselor and
you're told that you should stop doing
what you're doing
did you feel like they weren't taking
your concerns seriously um I don't know
if it may be on some you know deeper
level not consciously it was I like they
don't understand like what I'm going for
not consciously but maybe on you know
like a some kind of yeah so now we get
to a basic problem of what we're doing
so I don't know how much I'm leading you
or pushing you in a direction cuz it's
starting to feel that way and also I
think the whole reason that it's not
conscious like I agree that it's not
conscious and that's why it's this weird
[ __ ] feeling of existential dread
that you haven't done a conscious
understanding of where it comes from
well right so it's it's tricky because
now we're getting into the territory
where maybe I'm putting words in your
mouth because I'm really eating you in a
particular
you're like hitting the nail on the head
just right I feel like leading me in a
direction exactly
or if I'm sticking a nail in it it's
hard for us to tell scientifically right
yeah yeah absolutely and um but I feel
like you know where I'm going and yeah
where do you think I'm going what do you
understand about my line of questions I
hey well I think your line of
questioning is trying to get to the
conclusion of where the dread comes from
right yep do you have any sense of what
my hypothesis is yeah it's somewhere
along the lines is you know different as
a child must provide for themselves or
not provide but you know it seeks into
great independence from that
independence comes a sense of dread
because you're the only reliance right
yeah is that kind of where your thinking
is yes is that how you feel Michael I
don't know are you leading me with
questions no I'm asking no I don't know
anymore now ai ai ai ai ai think yes I
think okay so let me ask you something
Michael and I want you to be careful
about your logical mind mm-hmm and try
to tap into your emotional mind Michael
do you feel alone sometimes I mean
everyone does sometimes is that the
feeling that we're talking about do you
feel like a lot like does the future of
your life and I know logically it
doesn't include just you but does it
feel like it's just you like you're the
only person you can count on can count
on from a feelings perspective yes yeah
I can be honest about that yeah like
sheer feeling no logic it's like I I
know they're like this you know a great
support group around me logically but
feelings wise right now it's like I know
at least I can always count on me right
yeah so now let me ask you something
okay so
not gonna ask I'm just gonna say okay so
I'm gonna stop asking leading questions
because I think I don't know how much
I'm biasing you I don't think I am I
think you're pretty good yeah but let me
let me run you through my hypothesis and
we can look at it as scientists so first
thing is like who worries about not
being able to take care of themselves
oddly enough you may think that it's
people who lack faith in themselves but
it's funny because that's not where that
comes from okay
the worry about not being able to take
care of yourself is built on an
assumption that other people are not
gonna be around as well okay yeah I know
I follow you
does that make sense yeah that's
actually where this comes from because
why do you live in a world where you are
the only person that you can rely on and
we see we see threads of that like in
your independence uh-huh like we see
that like this is part like I think the
reason that this existential dread is so
hard for you to understand is because I
think it formed it is it's a primitive
formation okay and the reason that's
primitive is because it was formed when
you were very young
okay so generally speaking when our mind
forms certain ideas about ourselves that
idea hairy's the maturity at which it
was born
okay so right so like if I if I sit down
and I draw a picture at the age of four
that picture stays that way
yeah it's a very young thought it's like
a very carnal thought right absolutely
concept right like that like you're just
like there's no one and then like if we
think about it so then my next thought
is that okay so you know who is it that
worries about not being able to take
care of themself there's a lack of
confidence we don't get any of that from
you I mean do you would you say you lack
confidence in yourself yes oh yes yeah
interesting here yeah
no I know I come off as like a confident
person I'm an incredibly unconfident
person okay
so maybe I just about entirely sohere's
because the reason I asked that question
is because now we have to we have to
question my assumptions so worrying
about not being able to take care of
yourself comes from two places one is a
lack of faith in yourself
okay and the second is a lack of faith
in others because you're the only person
that you can look like I just lack faith
across the board sure yeah and and
that's what happens to people when
they're young they have general swathes
of beliefs about the way that the
universe works and they those thoughts
stay that way they stay that way and
then as we grow old and we're mature
like we have logical things that tell us
because how old are you now Michael
twenty-two okay so you're 22 right so
you have 22 year-old logic that tells
you this is not [ __ ] that you have to
worry about yeah but there's like five
year old Michael who's like I can't
count on myself and I can't count on
anyone else and I think those are
actually related sick that's badass
that's so [ __ ] cool
how like I've never really thought about
that so do you personally do you ever
like replace those thoughts in your head
like say you have like a core
understanding about yourself that was
formed at a very young age do you is
like your goal to replace that with the
logic of an older smarter you or like
what what do you do about that you
personally like do you ever go back and
you're like I developed this worldview
young am I going to change it now how
does that work
can I ask a question before I answer
yours yeah sure you said that's badass
which is not the response I was
expecting oh it's cool it's that's cool
I like learning about this okay I like
it's interesting right what is
interesting about that concept of you
know you're young and you because I just
gained a little understanding about
myself right that's cool right okay so
now now Michael we're gonna rewind a
little bit
sorry I have a couple more questions I'm
a happy to answer yours okay so don't
let me get away from it I got it I'm
making a note so now we get to the
earlier question which is does
understanding help you remember they
asked this earlier so you've gained a
little bit of understanding do you think
it helps yeah yeah for sure okay ma'am
right do you remember what your earlier
answer was it was uncertainty absolute
yeah so now now we get to an even more
interesting question which is how on
earth are you saying for like like
literally ten minutes ago it was
uncertainty and now your answer is
literally for sure
let's have that now I have the reaction
to finding the root of that or or at
least so strand of in what way then I
feel like you've been helped because you
do feel you feel helped yeah well I feel
you know a level of understanding which
is in this case made me feel helped
right yeah so so let maybe we can
explore that down the road but I think
that in and of itself is gonna be part
of your answer so you have to understand
what has changed in you because
something just changed okay that'll help
us understand like the science of how
this [ __ ] works okay okay so we can
table that first maybe we can go back to
that because we still get to kind of go
back to existential Venza but if your
question was do I go back and and remap
the short answer is like absolutely okay
so here's the reason why so like when we
think about it like so man I just okay
I've always like wondered how that this
I call or that you know the the
psychologist psychologies there
no this is a call catch-22 oh yeah well
I think you know you know what I mean by
dr. kay
spam spam spam like a little little pep
og emote okay can I go into teaching
mode yeah do you understand how the [ __ ]
works
I'll tell you how it works
okay so it's funny I was teaching this
like an hour ago
geez huh really
to whom to our coaches so this is what I
teach our coaches um oh nice okay so
we're gonna try this let's see so you're
a question let me just make sure I
remember it okay so you're a question
hold on hold on a second let me just
think about what we're saying let me
think about how to teach this and help
you understand and I may just recap for
my own benefit if that's okay
yeah okay so something you just learned
something so like what just happened and
then your question was do I go back and
like reanalyze things from the past and
then does that help me in some way and
the answer is yes okay so here's what
I'd like to do I'd like to explain like
how that works in your mind okay so
there's the engineering portion of it
not necessarily like the psychology this
is more about like the science of the
mind all right so here's my general
hypothesis about somewhere along the way
you grew up and like your parents were
not able to like relate to you or
understand you in a way that made you
feel quite isolated it doesn't mean they
didn't love you yeah yeah and I think we
sort of hear that when you say like your
dad was kind of weird all right like
what does that mean that means that like
it's not that he's weird to you it's
that you're weird to him like weirdness
is like yeah a 2-person yeah yeah yeah
right so so there's some kind of
fundamental disconnection where I
suspect when you were young and we can
we can see if this is the case I mean
this is also one of those things that's
like it's probably true of everyone but
so you have to be careful about like
whether you have a story like this but
like I would suspect that in your past
there were several times when you were
quite young and like people did not
fundamentally like understand and this
school counselors story is a fantastic
example because you knew something that
was deeply important to you and
will told you you were [ __ ] wrong
that's how you feel alone when the
people who are supposed to help you and
support you and understand the way that
you feel tell you that you're [ __ ]
wrong for feeling that way and you new
start so they just don't understand like
they just don't understand it and you
just don't understand that hmm that is a
world where everyone speaks a language
that you don't speak okay and then the
world becomes a [ __ ] scary place and
the future becomes uncertain because you
know you're gonna screw up at some time
but people the reason that people have
faith in the future is not just because
of themselves it's because of the people
around mm-hmm now the interesting thing
there's another interesting so then the
world becomes a scary place and it's
hard to like have faith in the future
because you don't know if you can count
on people like that's what it comes down
to yeah and the future is filled with
dread like there's a general dread if
you live in a world where you can't
count on other people uh-huh
is that and I'm not trying to put words
in your mouth so please God say no and
it was helpful when you said yeah I
don't have any confidence in myself but
like I mean is that how you feel do you
feel like in the future when you think
about your future
is it a multiplayer game or is it a
single-player game I'm not talking about
what you think I'm talking about what
you feel I mean I think my world view of
it is like is that like it's always like
I can always depend on myself right and
any supplement to that is just like is a
bonus right yeah like being able to
depend on anyone else is like a great
bonus but sure it's not something that I
see is like like a hugely necessary
they're not not necessary no sorry not
saying it's like not necessary I want
other people in my life right yeah
here's what I'm hearing
okay what I'm hearing is it's it's not a
multiplayer game it's a single-player
game with NPCs ah that makes me sound
like an [ __ ]
yeah so we have to be careful Michael I
don't think you're an [ __ ] at all I'm
saying that I think that's the way
you're describing it right like because
it's not an [ __ ] it doesn't mean that
you don't care about
other people it doesn't mean that other
people care about you it's that there is
a corner of your mind that feels like at
the end of the day if other people are
around and they do nice things for me
that's supplemental it's extra but at
the core of the being like it's just you
yeah I think a good way of putting it as
like like I don't like there's not like
I don't rely
yeah like rely on yes other people first
survival yes I guess bringing it down to
it's like most big yeah thanks so so now
we get to another important point which
is where do people learn to not rely on
others own for survival because
generally speaking that's what we do
right like we rely yeah as for survival
yeah so my hypothesis is that this is a
learned thing for you for you you
learned at some point that you kind of
couldn't count on others because I think
you were young so you also like you may
be a genius and sometimes this happens
like I'm not saying that to like you
know like make you feel good about
yourself or anything but like yeah I
noticed that so one of my teachers once
told me that kids with high IQ or
actually special needs kids okay think
about that that's very interesting
you know actually I I'm like inclined to
agree with you for some people because I
definitely went to school some very
smart people who were just different
right
like genius I went to school awesome
like really smart people and some of
them were like
III guess mm not not normal but do you
know what I mean like yeah so but others
were like like different people you know
yeah so sorry smart yeah I think I think
what I the point there is that I think
that like kids who are smarter or just
think different it's not like I mean we
make smarter like we place a value
judgment and I want to steer clear of
value judges I don't think you're a bad
person I don't think you're an [ __ ]
in fact everything that I've heard about
you makes you sound like you're a
wonderful guy and and you know I I don't
think that you don't love your parents I
don't think your parents love you but I
think we have to look at the mind as
what it is and like try to not let our
judgments interfere with what we see
yeah and in my experience there are some
people who have like I think you're a
special needs kid and I don't mean that
in a bad way I mean I think you had
special needs growing up like I think
that when your program you when you're
teaching yourself to program in high
school because you're worried about a
job you have some needs that other
[ __ ] high school kids who are sure
that they're gonna be fine for the rest
of the life don't have okay I'm not
saying you're dumb or in fact I think
that that's a special need that comes
from I understand what you're trying
yeah I really do I got it so it's funny
what you put like that no but really
like it's like it blew my mind
when they were like and she's like you
know smart kids or special-needs kids
because they have special needs you
can't treat them like everyone else hmm
you know like yeah yeah you try in fact
if you try to treat them like everyone
else which is exactly what your parents
and your counselor did it's harmful
oh yeah it's a problem i I I think it it
a lot of it boils down to like the way
that we perceive what schooling in
general should be and how it you know I
I'm sure you have ADD you've had a
million talks about how schooling is
broken and it just benefits one type of
like learner one type of kid I think a
lot of that boils down to that because
I'm not I'm not very good at schooling
yet personally so the that's that
that supports your your idea yeah
because I I did very bad poorly in all
manner of school so yeah so I think so
kind of going back to your earlier
question about okay like what do we do
about it right so like like now do you
go back and you reprogram things
absolutely
so I'm sorry I'm bouncing around a
little bit is it okay if we go back to
that no no it's nothing yeah I go back
hey it works okay we were trying a new
format and I wasn't sure if it was gonna
work
but thankfully my are like producers and
our geniuses on the healthy gamer team
oh wow this is great
okay okay so here's the idea okay so the
first thing is we have different parts
of our mind okay so the first part of
our mind is called Manas and so this is
the emotional mind
and it is the part of our mind that
likes or dislikes
and it is the part of the mind that
reacts okay
so let me ask you this Michael what's
what's the most recent food that you
tried for the first time maybe some like
like like time was it what's just like a
new food that you tried maybe I think it
was like eel okay did you like it yeah
yeah it was pretty good I'm not a big i
member picky eater okay but I yeah it
was alright okay so let me ask you
something how long did it take you to
like it or dislike it um I don't
remember ever tasting it before this is
like my first recollection of trying you
know yes good just like just I bit into
it it was I I don't usually like seafood
so it had a little barrier to it but it
tasted good tastes like chicken how long
did it take you to like it or dislike it
few seconds even that long maybe maybe
one second right so it happened fast and
rightly mechanically one second yes yeah
like like okay so less than one second
okay and so if we think about you know
let's say like so the Manas tends to act
fence it's the first part of the mind so
it's usually zero to one second is when
the - activates so if we think about
liking or disliking something there's
nothing logical about it there's nothing
rational about it it's just like you put
it in your mouth and you're like then
it's good or that isn't good mm-hmm
similarly if we think about emotional
situations those two can be kind of you
know they tend to be instant so if you
like you know someone walks up to you
and you're in high school and you're
like you know someone's been bullying
you and you see them in the hallway your
emotional reaction happens like in less
than a second does that make sense yeah
and so then what happens is like
sometimes we'll have an emotional
reaction like you have the sense of
existential dread and then sometimes
you'll use your rational mind to try to
fight it okay did that make sense yeah
so I
but the your rational mind is so you say
you don't like Seaford
so did you fight a little battle with
yourself before you try to ill yeah
and so what were the two parts of your
mind how would you kind of describe it
you know like a guttural I don't like
seafood and then uh just try it for head
its food it's it's you know try
different foods experience new things
kind of kind of mean yeah man ate it
experience new things
okay mm-hmm so that the thing to notice
is that like I like this word got it oh
sure you're good with words Michael so
thank you it's cool
so the modest is kind of guttural it's
visceral and it's like reactionary and
then our booty which is so this is kind
of our emotional mind that's the other
way we can think about it and then our
booty is like our analytical mind or our
intellect
okay okay so then like you have this
little war where your Manas is like I
don't like it and then your buddies like
just try it man like experience new
things come on bro uh-huh and then they
fight a little war and then depending on
you know which one wins you'll either
try the eel or you won't try that you
okay so the interesting thing is like so
how well-developed do you think your
Whoopi is when you're given not not at
all not absolutely at all how well
develop do you think your Manas is when
you're young all the way not not all the
way but it is in control yep and so else
you get older Manas may say roughly the
same but would be changes over time okay
that's the difference between old and
young mm-hmm
okay and so the interesting thing is
that you know the the thoughts and
impressions that are laid down in the
mind at a young age are gonna be like
lobe with deep thoughts they're not
gonna be like nuanced or understood
they're gonna be like so the existential
dread is that like a mana sort of would
be thing
sounds like a Manas thing absolutely
right so it's like just this like raw
sort of got a little beautiful word sort
of sense within you so now I'm going to
run you through a couple examples so
let's say that so this is my favorite
example and I'm trying to come up with
another one but we're gonna choose this
one because that's the best one I can
think of so let's say that I'm walking
down the street with my four-year-old
and she sees a dog and she pets the dog
and the the dog kind of turns around
like nips at her a little bit
mmm-hmm what do you think the first
thing that happened what's the first
thing that happens in her mind fear dab
SOG bad right fear don't know okay so
that's her - reacts with from zero to
one side and then what's the next thing
that happens in her mind dog bad okay
it's funny I had the same problem
teaching with this example earlier
because most of the people that we teach
don't our kids so what does my dog do
probably seeks refuge with her parents
absolutely seeks refuge with their
parents is such a you know
twenty-two-year-old thing to say what
does she actually do
cries and hugs or a father or mother
absolutely hogs daddy picked me up
mm-hmm so this is a thought right she
tells me daddy picked me up she holds up
her ops mm-hmm so at this point this is
actually her booty but it's like not
very well developed okay okay and then
so so then what happens is like I say oh
you know like I check her out turns out
that you know the dog was just sniffing
her wasn't actually biting her and then
she cries I comfort her a little bit and
then I say oh look there's an ice-cream
shop do you want some ice cream and then
she says yes
ten minutes later she's got ice cream in
her hands and what's going on in her
mind she is happy with the afternoon
absolutely and what kind of thoughts is
she having do you think um not about the
dog absolutely she's just having normal
thoughts she's telling me about him
buying the ice cream you know she's
eating eating the ice cream she's
telling me about this picture that she
colored she's telling me about like you
know how she's like played with the ball
yesterday just like normal thoughts yeah
okay so now let me ask you something
Mike Michael where did these feelings go
the the feelings about the dog mm-hmm
are they gone no they probably
manifested and some they're probably she
remembers them right sure like in some
way she has a fear the next time she
sees a dog she'll probably been reckless
exactly right so the next time she sees
a dog so the next day we're walking down
the street she sees a dog what happens
in her mind
the dog bit me last time that's not the
first thing that happens in her mind is
it fear absolutely hmm right so she
freaks the [ __ ] out and if you guys have
like dealt with kids who are scared of
dogs
like you know it like all they have to
do is just see the dog yeah and then
they start freaking out there mm-hmm
right and so the question is like where
does that fear come from from that
previous experience so where did the
fear go between here and here somewhere
in her head right absolutely so this
gets stored in her unconscious mind is
something called a sauce sky some sky
some sky
si M s ka ra so this is a ball of
undigested emotion okay okay and so now
let's think about you so let's say Mike
Michael you're going down the street and
you see a dog and you pet the dog and
the dog bites you what's the first thing
that happens in your line ow dog bad a
fear fear fear fear right okay so then
then you have a thought your first thing
is a reaction dog bat and then what
happens in your mind
the reaction move away from the dog sure
you move away you mean after that yep
what comes after that what do you think
after you move away from the dog
dog bad I hate Sherlock okay all right
um I don't know what comes after that so
like you may check to see if you're hurt
okay right and then you may like start
to think about the situation yes
like what kind of thoughts would you
have about the situation I wonder whose
dog that was that I just went up in pet
and bit me yeah wonder if I need to go
to the hospital for a rabies shot
yep um but why did the dog bite me yep
no lots of thoughts yep and then how are
you feeling in ten minutes
probably okay I'm probably chillin
mm-hmm okay and then you're feeling
feeling okay great so now
the next time you see a dog since I
probably since I you know more developed
I will think that is not the same dog
unless it is in which case it's an
[ __ ] and what's what's the first
thing that happens in your mind oh
probably again fear yep and then what
happens
if it's not the same dog I may try to
pet it again okay hold on hold on is it
the same dog yeah if it is that's a
problem right but that's a thought
yeah yeah so now like even though you
get this some degree of fear your
response to it is different right so
this is like lower fear got it so the
question is like why does my daughter
react with essentially the same amount
of fear and you react with last year
that is your question
yep my worldview is different from it
okay so what changes
why is your worldview different from her
worldview because I understand it's not
the same unless it is the same dog in
which case why okay so what do you say I
understand what part of the mind and
we're in this process does your
understanding come from the booty right
is that absolutely trying to go for all
right so this is also the part of the
process that's different right here
okay so like what you do here is some
amount of processing okay you like you
essentially go from fear to feeling okay
and what's in the middle is this so you
kind of like process with yourself and
then you're kind of like okay maybe I
shouldn't pet dogs on the street you
kind of work through the problem and
then you're feeling okay and then you
may still have a visceral reaction but
then you're not gonna like it's not
gonna be exactly the same
whereas for her like this this step it's
the ten second to ten minute that I did
what what did I do for her you went and
got ice cream afterwards right a
structure right so this is processing
these are the important questions if you
don't have a chance to like sit down and
think about what happened to you and
what you did right and what you did
wrong and what the dog is then you
wouldn't you may let be left over with a
some scar but when you use distraction
or like a parent you know like you know
distracts you from it then that fear
basically goes dormant is this some spar
and then rises up again okay if you
treat it with distraction if you treat
it with distraction and this is what
we'll call processing
okay okay so now we think about now we
go back to your earlier question which
was do I go back and think about stuff
that happened to me when I was young
abso-fucking-lutely
okay and what I do as an adult is this I
add this step over here um so I recall
and experience all I'll tell you one so
this two makes my dad sound like kind of
an [ __ ] but he's not nestl he's a
great guy huh
so when I was 13 I started a business
God and what I did is I started a BBS
you know what that is nope so a BBS is
something called a bulletin board system
so this is in the days before the
internet you got a dial-up connection
and you had a server and what would
happen is like people would use their
dial-up connection to call your house it
would connect to your computer which was
a server I mean and your server like you
had some persistent thing so people
could log on to like my server and they
can play different kinds of games they
could post on forums they could post
like pictures and things like that
that's gonna they had to log off but
only one user could log on time oh wow
okay well that's cool all right and
that's like the early days of the
internet before it was like a persistent
universe like you had to log on to one
person server and you had to interact
with them yeah yeah and so I ran a BBS
and I charged people $10 a month which
was a ridiculous amount of money back
then for access to my BBS and I had like
13 people
I started $10 a week and then I had 13
people that would be like users on my
BBS and I was making 130 bucks a week
back in like 19 like 94 or something so
after a couple and the interesting thing
so I was lucky enough to have parents
who were wealthy and so I never really
like needed money for anything like I
never had an allowance or whatever my
grades were good I got whatever I wanted
my grades were bad I didn't get whatever
I wanted all I ever wanted was video
games so it was like sort of simple I
wasn't like period materialistic I just
yeah and so I had kind of like Tiger
parents who were like sort of like yeah
you can't play games unless you're
you're great you're gonna do so I think
selected ton up like so I knew money was
good but I don't really have any use for
money so I just the wad of cash I'm like
hundreds of dollars just like sitting
somewhere not like I did it but one day
like my dad found
and then like he comes to me he's like
what is this and then I told him that
Ivan started a business and then he said
can you any idea what he said how did he
ask if you were selling drugs yeah so I
explained what the business was good
yeah okay and he was not impressed with
the business yeah so it's funny right so
actually I think he was impressed and he
still shot it down he was like I
shouldn't be doing this right now you
shouldn't be focusing on your studies
but I remember now that he was kind of
smiling when he said it because he could
tell that I was a clever kid but he
still shut it down and he took my money
away the money you had no value to me
but he took it away and so I was like
okay well I guess like you know whatever
hmm and so years later I I was I guess I
still AM so I was a faculty at a
particular academic institution and
there was someone at the academic
institution who had been very supportive
for me so they had actually been like
supportive to me when I was a medical
student and they even like you know were
supportive to me in terms of figuring
out where I went to become a
psychiatrist and so they really like
they've been nothing but nice and then I
had started to develop something at a
hospital that I was at that was like
pretty good and pretty robust and was
doing very well
and for some reason I became paranoid
that like this person was gonna try to
take credit for it and it was really
really bizarre but like it's like it's
what worried me and I was I was going
through some training slash and part of
that training was to kind of be in my
own therapy and so I was I was talking
with someone who's who is a therapist
and we were kind of talking about
they're like okay so just pick something
so that you know we can work on it and I
said okay well this is what's bothering
like I'm afraid that this guy's gonna
like take credit for my work and as we
dug into it I realize like this is
completely idiotic the guy has done
nothing but be supported for years why
on earth do I think that he's gonna take
something that's mine and what we kind
of came down to is like oh I have this
some scar are people who are like
positive figures in my life taking away
I have built I and it's really bizarre
because like no one had ever triggered
this before because the person has to be
like in order for my mind to associate
this situation with what happened to me
in the past
uh-huh like they have to meet certain
requirements right like it can't be a
cat it has to whoa yeah yeah it needs a
bit like a like your father like someone
you trust no exactly someone I trust
someone who cares about me and I'm
building something that is wildly
successful and then they're gonna take
it away because this is what happens cuz
that's how the brain learns mm-hmm
because my brain learned hey when these
things happen you get [ __ ] so watch
out because you're gonna get [ __ ] and
so now we get to your question which is
do you go back and do you analyze it and
the answer is absolutely okay because if
you want your source of existential
dread to go away I'm glad you feel
helped by it
okay I'm gonna switch back to the other
layout do you have questions about this
format or
like anything that were mad I mean sorry
questions about the diagrams or any of
those terms or anything
sorry I've we've been using diagrams oh
[ __ ] man I just I'm watching you talk
about your subs guys the last 25 likes
cool all over Oh see there's a soft
start what Dyke okay here let me show
you oh god I'm so sorry Mike come on let
me do this oh god I screwed up hold on
okay hold on I will rectify it oh [ __ ]
so everyone watching at home knows this
because I've been doing diagrams okay
I'm glad that they got this okay sure
this okay there I've been writing I've
been taking down oh wow okay so let me
let me run through this real quick okay
let's let's catch up my politics can you
see this now it's fine yes I can see
this okay okay well thing okay
so here's the first thing so between
zero and one second you know the -
happens first
so it's emotional it as likes and
dislikes it reacts its guttural the
booty is analytical and it this was kind
of the war that we talked about between
oh you don't like seafood and then you
were telling yourself just try it yeah
okay
so then we get to the first scenario
which is my daughter so this is daughter
mm-hmm so in the first second between
zero and one second we have - okay so
this is - and then we have thoughts
after that so this is where would the
activates okay wow dude you're a boss if
you were following this without seeing
the diagrams you know it might have been
easier like I'm not I'm not great at
looking at diagrams okay I kind of like
the personal rhetoric style sure okay so
then what happens is distraction right I
give her ice cream and then she's happy
and then what happens is this fear lives
in the some unconscious as a some scar
and that it emerges the next time we see
a dog right and in your case this part
is the same this part is the same but
then you're booed these steps in in this
critical step and helps you process and
then you end up feeling okay and then
the next time you see a dog you still
have that reaction but then you don't
freak out again because you've sort of
processed some of that emotion so
there's some scar is smaller
okay got it does that make sense yeah
okay we're gonna go back to this and
then we're gonna do this and then we're
gonna do this okay sorry about not
showing you the diagram it's not as fun
so you asked me a question do I go back
and re-examine things that happen to me
in my life and the answer is absolutely
yes
okay can you and what happened back to
yourself huh I'm just looking at myself
right now
oh very introspective mirror cut I'm
sorry I think so now what what I would
encourage you to do is to think a little
bit about like you know where this sense
so this is what you've got to do is like
go bet I can
think about like times in your life
where you felt a lot and you felt like
the only person you could rely on was
yourself mm-hmm because I can I would
bet money that that's the way that you
felt when you got walked into the
counselor's office
yeah I'm sure yeah right yeah and and so
like that strengthens the some scar
that's like you being bit by the dog the
second time and so the reason that your
feeling of existential dread is so
pervasive is because you've been bit by
a dog hundreds of times okay and so
you're some scar is quite large now and
you have it lives with you all the time
doesn't even need a trigger it's just
like there all the time okay and I'm
sure you can imagine that if you've been
bit by a dog hundreds of times you don't
even need to see a dog to feel anxious
about nothing yeah it's just like there
could be a dog yeah and and so I would
encourage you to think back like you
know can you imagine can you remember
the first time that you felt like your
parents like you couldn't count on your
parents and I know we're making him
sound like [ __ ] I'm not saying
they're [ __ ] I know my dad was a
good person but everyone winds up with
some scars that's just how it works it's
because our mind is not well formed
mm-hm can't thing back that I don't know
I get I had a similar experience to you
where I started a small business not as
smart I was selling sodas at school but
they shut that down very similar
actually I don't think that's it though
I don't know I can't think back to so
tell me about your dad being weird
he's just he's funny in social
situations with other people
definitely
he's a you know like is he funny with
you when you say what do you mean by
funny
whatever you mean by fun what do I mean
by funny yeah he said he's funny with
other people in social situations I like
what about like I don't think he he's
not very good at social norms like when
talking to people okay okay that's
that's what I mean by funny um yeah
that's what I mean by weird it's not
like now I'm never gonna social queues
okay okay oh it's not in the way I think
okay so that's a whole other
conversation so I think that makes sense
in terms of some of your self-reliance
because it sounds like there may be some
so a lot of confidence comes from
empathic mirroring okay so if we think
about something else to mirror from huh
like from something else
mirror yeah so like the way that a child
learns to move confidently in the world
basically has to do with how secure they
feel with their parents and how secure
they feel with their parents depends
roughly on how much their parents impact
like a mirror their emotions okay so
when when a child like like like the
world is a safe place when I bump my
head and I hurt and my parents run over
and scoop me up and express concern then
the world like becomes a safe place
because when I'm hurt there are people
there that express concern and like that
makes sense because the world reacts the
way that I feel
oh that sort of makes sense yeah yeah
absolutely and and so a lot of times
confidence happens when conference
problems happen when there are parents
who can't mirror what a child's
emotional needs are because then the
world becomes a confusing place where
shockingly the only person you can rely
on is yourself
uh-huh because the rest of the world
doesn't get ya the rest of the world
doesn't react the way you feel yeah I
see what you mean and so then you become
a pillar it becomes a single-player game
and you can't count on other people
okay so I wonder a little bit about you
know whether that plays into this
because you're saying that your dad
doesn't like pick up on social cues so
also then yeah I mean unclear it's just
another piece that could contribute yeah
so that by the way is attachment theory
if you're interested in reading like
attachment theory sort of talks about
like how security from a child comes
from empathic mirroring of parents
that's that arresting okay yeah so in
terms of practically what do you so
questions for me actually let's start
there no not really
okay so let me try to give you like so
you're one of your questions is like
okay maybe I don't know if this is only
your question but what do I do about it
okay yeah that's a good standard yeah
yeah so I would say that you know try to
notice that feeling of X is Central grad
whenever it's there and find out first
of all analyze it with your would be
because the more you analyze it with
your buddy I mean not just accept and
sometimes analysis involves like sitting
with it too but really like re
experiencing it and then like be a
shepherd for yourself okay so imagine
that there's like six year old Michael
or 13 year old Michael who's getting
taken into the counselor's office mm-hmm
and imagine the way that you felt and
then imagine that there's like
twenty-two year old Michael who's like
older and can be reliable and if nothing
else if you can't rely on anyone else
you can at least rely on 22 year old
Michael okay yeah and 22 year old
Michael is like gonna go back and tell
13 year old hey man like I know a lot of
people don't understand you bro and I
know you feel alone and isolated but
like it's okay and you're gonna be okay
and you don't have to be alone in this
world and there are people that love you
mm-hmm okay how do you feel about that
I like that like being your own kind of
pillar to mirror back on yeah yeah okay
I like this so when you think about when
you feel that way that feeling of
existential dread see if you can do that
with yourself or see if this feeling
reminds you of something in your past
okay
and then sit down and like think through
it in that way okay
okay and then if you do that over time I
think what's gonna happen is the feeling
of existential dread will get back okay
like this and my hope is that for them
you don't have to feel that way all the
time every yeah be nice yeah and then
the last thing that I'll point out is
that I don't know exactly how you had
that moment of feeling helped and then
you said for sure it helps I don't know
what that was but I think if you
continue doing this it'll result in more
of whatever happened for just a fraction
of a second mm-hmm that's the way you
cultivate more of those responses and
you're sure it helped like user like
you're like yeah for sure and then as
you do that for a while I don't know
exactly how it works but it helps and
then one day you're gonna wake up and
it's like not gonna be that big of a
deal okay I like this right yeah
how you feel yell I'll try that out not
feeling good yeah okay also if you if
you need some guidance and this kind of
thing so the other thing is that that
you know that emotional processing that
Woody does therapy also basically works
on that principle mmm so it's one of the
ways so the other thing you can think
about is is if you huh helping you
process yeah so it like that's how that
model of the mind like that's how I
understand what therapy is doing okay so
you can also think about seeing a mental
health professional depending on how bad
it is okay I mean I I consider I'm
despite that I'm a generally pretty
happy person yeah I can tell you assam
um but maybe i mean if it if it helps I
could consider it I'll you know try it
on my own first
oh yeah just think the recommendation
yeah
any other questions for me or thoughts
not really I mean I'd yeah I enjoyed the
talk like cool very insightful learned a
lot it's interesting sometimes I people
how to meditate are you interested in in
doing that today
sure yeah I I've tried meditation before
I I don't know like what are there
different types of meditation yeah
because I've done the one where you just
like try to empty all thoughts and just
try and be completely present mm-hmm
that and that's the one I've tried
before it's nice okay do like a
different kind of one yeah I do a lot of
different kinds of meditation depending
on what the goals are okay so there are
some meditations that are more cognitive
some meditations that are more physical
some meditations that are more
psychological some meditations that are
more spiritual okay what do you
recommend what are you what do you want
what do you want to be different about
um I think I think acting being in the
present more would definitely help
because I act a lot in the past and in
the you know thoughts of the future so
something to help you be in the present
okay are you up for doing something
that's a little bit more physical sure
are you okay feeling a little bit silly
own stream yeah my like pork on the like
kind of like a one of those what is that
nothing nothing
yeah no we'll go for it okay so I'm
gonna ask you to push your your chair
back sir and I'm gonna ask you to stand
up I'm gonna take off my headphones okay
okay can [ __ ] hear that Kenny I can't
hear you but that's okay can you hear me
okay so I want you to close your eyes
okay all right
just stand up straight
and now I want you to your mind to just
go where it goes so I start thinking
about the past start thinking about the
future
I'm really thinking about I think about
what you're gonna be doing next I still
can't hear you but what I would be being
soon ok so just think about the future
think about the past think about what
you're gonna do later today think about
who you're gonna see
now I want you to open your eyes and
look at me okay now I want you to do
this raise your arms above your head
okay and then I want you to take your
right foot and put it above your right
knee good and now I want you to close
your eyes and think about who you're
gonna see later okay so go ahead and
come back down so and as you adopt the
position so now we're gonna do it again
you can try with the left foot please
you dock the position I want you to know
that set your mind it's gonna force you
into the crust okay you're not going to
be able to think about other pests okay
so let's try again just try to maintain
the position
you can open your eyes open your eyes
open your Eska and focus
what are you thinking about balancing
yeah he can't [ __ ] hear me why am I
talking that's fine
I can't I can't hear when you speak like
that but yeah so just just notice what
you're thinking about right yes I feel
the present I feel pretty focused on
right now it's hard to do this and not
be focused on right now okay we can't
hear you but that's okay oh I know okay
so go ahead and come on that okay so so
now all right what were you thinking
about when you were bowed out about
balancing I was thinking about balancing
so now I'm gonna ask you an interesting
question so were you actually thinking
about balancing or were you focusing on
balancing what's the difference that's
that's what I mean so like when I'm
eating food I can think of better eating
food or I can actually just enjoy the
food uh-huh did that make sense yeah
yeah the difference what are you like
thinking like oh this is me balancing
were you just like your attention I was
doing the act of balancing yes so that's
how you come to the present because you
can't be in the past of the future when
you're doing that yeah if you try
difficult things so I had to be focused
on it yes okay and so the easy mode is
with your eyes open so your your sense
of balance comes from three neurological
parts it comes from your vestibular
system which is in your ears it comes
from your eye and it comes from your
dorsal columns or your proprioception or
your sensation of like position in space
okay positioning yeah I got it okay so
the interesting thing is that if you
close your eyes it becomes more
difficult to balance because you're
losing yeah you're not focusing on one
spot you're losing one of those three
rays yeah so it becomes hard so at the
beginning if you need to balance with
your eyes open
go for it and then at some point you're
gonna get good at it and then your mind
will start to wander and you won't need
to focus anymore
and when your mind starts to wander
close your eyes and then it'll become
harder okay so in general I think
Michael for whatever reason I feel like
maybe body is a good
for you to focus in the present so I'll
also tell you like do you out do you do
yoga done yet no I do not okay so I
think about maybe learning yoga and the
reason to learn yoga is because yoga is
not about like it's not about physical
health the reason that yoga was
developed is because when you do a yoga
posture it's not about how much you
stretch it's about focusing your mind on
the present so the reason that people do
yoga is because when they do yoga
properly you can't think about anything
else just about yoga yes and so what you
want from yoga is a position that is
stable and brings your mind to the
present and that way if you have a
position that you can hold for 10
minutes and it brings your mind to the
present then you can be in the present
for 10 minutes and it's like op2 just
use your body to force yourself to do
that you don't have to have to worry
about emptying your mind like you you
can you can try as hard as you want you
to think about stuff and you won't be
able to okay that's that's cool yeah
that's very interesting I never I didn't
realize yoga was
developed with that intent yep that's
cool you can also do like other things
like you can just go like this I'll try
it out and then if you just hold this
for a while soon like you can think
about things but as your arms get tired
they're gonna start to demand your
attention no just hold but using your
body to force attend yeah just just hold
it for a while and at some point your
body's gonna be like hey put our arms
down and you're gonna be like nope not
yeah and then you're gonna be focused on
so just focus on that sensation you
won't be able to think about anything
else all right
Janet's my exercise is therapeutic
that may be different but that's alright
yeah I'll try it out any last thoughts
or questions before we wrap up Michael
Reaves no I think is pretty fun
productive enjoyed talking thank you for
the appreciate it having me on yeah man
thanks for coming on and Mars yeah man
I'm I'm a big I like you a lot
thank you have you ever when you're
talking about the ear thing then inner
ear for balance have you ever seen those
you can stimulate the inner ear with
electrodes to make a person balance to
one side or not so you can you can you
can send electrical signals through the
vestibular system to like manipulate
balance it does just a fun tidbit I I
thought of what you were talking about
yeah that makes sense
so so usually like under neurons
transmit electricity yeah and and
generally speaking when we come to
applied neuroscience you know you can
stimulate different parts of the brain
with electrodes to do all kinds of stuff
so yeah that's that's cool yeah as a
little tidbit you can just like buy
those [ __ ] cool yeah odds are that
you might be interested in sticking
electrodes in your ear does that sound
like a good idea it's not yeah I
appreciate you taking the time to talk
with me yeah man thanks for coming on
and thanks for being open and honest and
and present man I appreciate it yeah of
course thank you and good luck to you
and you don't have to fear the future
any other people around thanks you'll be
okay bro
all right take care is it you as well
right
all righty